Revocation and Status Assertions flows reviewed (#308)
italia/eidas-it-wallet-docs: docs/en/revocation-lists.rst

This section outlines the key technical requirements and processes related to the revocation of Digital Credentials. 
Furthermore, it provides the technical details that the Verifiers MUST implement to verify, in a secure and reliable manner, the validity of a Digital Credential during the presentation phase.

> The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

> The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_ specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_ specification.
```

> The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_ specification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The verification of the validity of a Digital Credential is based on the `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

A Status Assertion is a signed document serving as proof of a Digital Credential's current validity status. The Credential Issuer provides these assertions to Holders who can present them to Verifiers together with the corresponding Digital Credentials. 

The Status Assertions have the following features:

- automated issuance, as the User authentication is not required for the provisioning of the Status Assertion; 
- verification of the Digital Credential validity status in both online and offline scenarios;
- privacy-preserving, according to the following evidences:

>   1. the Verifier cannot check over time the validity of a given  Digital Credential related to the User;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  1. the Verifier can check the validity of the Credential during the presentation phase. It is not able to check the validity of a given Digital Credential related to the User over time and out of the scope of the User authentication;
```

>   2. the Credential Issuers cannot track when and where a Digital Credential is verified;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2. the Credential Issuers is not able to know to which Verifier the Digital Credential or the Status Assertion will be presented;
```

Functional Requirements
-----------------------

> In addition to the requirements in Section 5 of `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02, **The Status Assertion:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the requirements in Section 5 of `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_, **The Status Assertion:**
```

Functional Requirements
-----------------------

> **The Status Assertion:**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the requirements in Section 5 of `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02, **The Status Assertion:**
```

- SHOULD be presented in conjunction with the Digital Credential; 
- MUST include information that links it to the referenced Digital Credential;
- MUST be timestamped with its issuance datetime, using a timestamp which is at or after the time of Digital Credential issuance which it refers;
- MUST contain the expiration datetime after which both the Status Assertion and the Digital Credential referred to SHOULD NOT be considered as having a valid status, since it appears without verification against any revocation.
- MUST have the expiration datetime greater than the Status Assertion issuance datetime and it MUST end before the expiration datetime of the Digital Credential;
- MUST have a validity period not greater than 24 hours;
- MUST provide the proof about the non-revocation of the Digital Credential which is related to and MUST be validated using the cryptographic signature of the Credential Issuer;
- MUST NOT reveal any information about the Relying Party, the User's device or the User's data contained in the Digital Credential the assertion is related to;

> - MUST be non-repudiable even beyond its expiration time and even in the case of cryptographic keys rotation.

Reviewer: don't redefine the same requirements but point to the section defined in the status assertions draft

> - MUST be non-repudiable even beyond its expiration time and even in the case of cryptographic keys rotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- MUST have a validity period not greater than 24 hours;
- MUST NOT reveal any information about the Relying Party, the User's device or the User's data contained in the Digital Credential the assertion is related to;
- MUST be non-repudiable even beyond its expiration time and even in the case of cryptographic keys rotation.
```

>     - The User notifies an Authentic Source that one or more attributes are changed (e.g. the current resident address): in this case the Credentials SHALL be revoked, as they are no longer valid due to the change in attributes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The User notifies an Authentic Source that one or more attributes are changed (e.g. the current resident address): in this case the Credentials MUST be revoked, as they are no longer valid due to the change in attributes. 
```

    - Users who lose access to their Wallet Instance (e.g., due to theft or loss of the device) can request the Credential Issuer to revoke their Credentials or ask the Wallet Provider to revoke the Wallet Instance. If the Wallet Provider is authorized by the User and is aware of the types of Credentials and their issuers stored in the Wallet, it can then initiate the revocation of all Digital Credentials contained within the Wallet Instance on behalf of the User.
    - The Law-Enforcing Authorities, for the fulfillment of their functions and any other judicial reasons, may request the Authentic Source to revoke entitlements, licenses, certificates, identification documents, etc., which in turn leads to the revocation of any linked Credentials.

>     - The Authentic Sources that for any administrative reasons update one or more attributes of a User, shall inform the Credential Issuer of related Credentials. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The Authentic Sources that for any update of one or more User attributes, shall inform the Credential Issuer that has previously requested those data for the issuance of a Credential about that User. 
```

>     - The Authentic Sources that for any update of one or more User attributes, shall inform the Credential Issuer that has previously requested those data for the issuance of a Credential about that User. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The Authentic Sources that for any update of one or more User attributes, SHOULD inform the Credential Issuer that has previously requested those data for the issuance of a Credential about that User. 
```

>     - The Credential Issuers, for technical security reasons (e.g. in the case of compromised cryptographic keys, death of the User, etc.), can decide to revoke the Credentials.

Reviewer: dead of the user is not a technical reason

can -> SHOULD

Author: The commit https://github.com/italia/eudi-wallet-it-docs/pull/308/commits/98136f003cb59e60bb9917ac9b8fd9c649af7334 aims to solve this conversation.

>     - The Credential Issuers, for technical security reasons (e.g. in the case of compromised cryptographic keys, loss of device, etc.), SHOULD decide to revoke the Credentials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The Credential Issuers, for technical security reasons (e.g. in the case of compromised cryptographic keys), SHOULD decide to revoke the Credentials.
```

The revocation scenarios involve two main flows:

    - The **Revocation flows**: these flows describe how an Entity requests for a Digital Credential revocation. 

>     - The **Status Assertion flows**: these flows define the technical protocols for requesting and obtaining a Status Assertion and how the Wallet Instance will provide it to a Verifier as a proof of validity of a corresponding Digital Credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The **Status Assertion flows**: these flows define the technical protocols for requesting and obtaining a Status Assertion and how the Wallet Instance SHOULD provide it to a Verifier as a proof of validity of a corresponding Digital Credential.
```

----------------

Depending on the different scenarios that may involve the revocation of a Digital Credential, different processes and technical flows may be implemented, according to national laws or Regulations of specific domains.

> The subsequent sections define the protocol interface between the Wallet Instances and the Credential Issuers during the revocation request. The communication between the Credential Issuers and other Entities is out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subsequent sections define the protocol interface between the Wallet Instances and the Credential Issuers during the revocation request.
```

not clear which would be other Entities. Do you mean the authentic sources?

Reviewer 2: The revocation flow could be triggered by:

1. Legal Authority or law enforcement
2. Wallet Provider (if it enables this feature)
3. Authentic Source

The current version specify only the protocol interface between the Wallet Instance and the Credential Issuer. We probably should define protocol interfaces for the above entities in a future milestone.

@peppelinux and @fmarino-ipzs, do you agree?

Author: The mentioned sentence was already present in the current version of this specification: "The communication between the Issuers and other Entities is out-of-scope of this technical implementation profile." It was not introduced by my pull request, but if you prefer to remove it, I'll accept your review. WDYT?

Reviewer: @m-basili issues created for future milestone 
https://github.com/italia/eudi-wallet-it-docs/issues/369

The `revocation_assertion_requests` MUST be set with an array of strings, where each string within the array represents a Credential Revocation Request object.

It MUST be signed with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential (such as the Credential Issuer Signed JWT in the case of SD-JWT, or the MSO in the case of Mdoc CBOR). Then, the Wallet Instance sends the request to the Credential Issuer as in the following non-normative example representing a Revocation Assertion Request array.

.. _credential_revocation_request_ex:
.. code-block::
    
    POST /revoke HTTP/1.1
    Host: pid-provider.example.org
    Content-Type: application/json

    revocation_assertion_requests : ["${base64url(json({typ: (some pop for revocation-assertion)+jwt, ...}))}.payload.signature", ... ]

Below, is given a non-normative example of a single Revocation Assertion Request object with decoded JWT headers and payload and without signature for better readability:

.. _credential_pop_jwt_ex:
.. code-block::

    {
      "alg": "ES256",

>       "typ": "revocation-assertion-request+jwt",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "typ": "credential-revocation-request+jwt",
```

    
    Wallet Instance Initiated Revocation Flow

> **Step 1 (Credential Revocation Request)**: The Wallet Instance initiates the process by creating a Credential Revocation Request. This request can be sent to a single Credential Issuer, regarding multiple Digital Credentials, and MUST contain a JSON object with the member `revocation_requests`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 1 (Credential Revocation Request)**: The Wallet Instance initiates the process by creating a Credential Revocation Request. This request MUST be sent to the Credential Issuer who has previously issued that Credential. The Credential Revocation Request MUST contain a JSON object with the member `revocation_requests`.
```

> The `revocation_requests` MUST be set with an array of strings, where each string within the array represents a Credential Revocation Request object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `revocation_requests` MUST be set with an array of strings, where each string within the array represents a Credential Revocation Request object, enabling the Wallet Instance to request multiple Credential Revocation Requests to a single Credential Issuer.
```

> It MUST be signed with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential (such as the Credential Issuer Signed JWT in the case of SD-JWT, or the MSO in the case of Mdoc CBOR). Then, the Wallet Instance sends the request to the Credential Issuer as in the following non-normative example representing a Revocation Assertion Request array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request MUST be signed with the private key related to the public key contained within the Credential (such as the Credential Issuer Signed JWT in the case of SD-JWT, or the MSO in the case of Mdoc CBOR). Then, the Wallet Instance sends the request to the Credential Issuer as in the following non-normative example representing a Revocation Assertion Request array.
```

      "iat": 1698744039,
      "exp": 1698744139, 
      "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c",
      "credential_hash": $Issuer-Signed-JWT-Hash,

>       "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256"
```

      "iat": 1698744039,
      "exp": 1698744139, 
      "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c",
      "credential_hash": $Issuer-Signed-JWT-Hash,
      "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",

>       "credential_type": "PersonalIdentiticationData",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>       "user_identifier": "001",
>       "document_id": "PID-98765"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    }

> **Step 2 (PoP verification)**: The Credential Issuer verifies the signature of the PoP using the the confirmation method that was attested in the issued Digital Credential. If the verification is successful, it means that the Wallet Instance owns the private keys associated with the Digital Credential, and therefore is entitled to request its revocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 2 (PoP verification)**: The Credential Issuer verifies the proof of possession of the Credential requested to be revoked, using the the confirmation method that was attested in the Credential. If the verification is successful the revocation request is allowed.
```

> **Step 3 (Credential Revocation)**: The Credential Issuer revokes the Credential provided in the revocation_requests object. After the revocation, the Credential Issuer MAY also send a notification to the User (e.g. using a User's email address, telephone number, or any other verified and secure communication channel), with all needed information related to the Credential revocation status update. This communication is out of scope of the current technical implementation profile. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Step 3 (Credential Revocation)**: The Credential Issuer revokes the Credential provided in the Revocation Request object. After the revocation, the Credential Issuer MAY also send a notification to the User (e.g. using a User's email address, telephone number, or any other verified and secure communication channel), with all needed information related to the Credential revocation status update. This communication is out of scope of the current technical implementation profile. 
```

**Step 4 (Credential Revocation Response)**: The Credential Issuer sends a response back to the Wallet Instance with the result of the revocation request.

.. code::

    .. code-block:: http
		HTTP/1.1 200 Ok
		Content-Type: application/json

		{
			"revocation_assertion_responses": ["${base64url(json({typ: revocation_assertion+jwt, ...}))}.payload.signature", ... ]
		}
 

> Credential Revocation HTTP Request

Reviewer: is this duplicated with the previous one?

Reviewer: nope.

      "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
    }

**Step 2 (PoP verification)**: The Credential Issuer verifies the signature of the PoP using the the confirmation method that was attested in the issued Digital Credential. If the verification is successful, it means that the Wallet Instance owns the private keys associated with the Digital Credential, and therefore is entitled to request its revocation.

**Step 3 (Credential Revocation)**: The Credential Issuer revokes the Credential provided in the revocation_assertion_requests object. After the revocation, the Credential Issuer MAY also send a notification to the User (e.g. using a User's email address, telephone number, or any other verified and secure communication channel), with all needed information related to the Credential revocation status update. This communication is out of scope of the current technical implementation profile. 

**Step 4 (Credential Revocation Response)**: The Credential Issuer sends a response back to the Wallet Instance with the result of the revocation request.

.. code::

    .. code-block:: http

> 		HTTP/1.1 200 Created

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		HTTP/1.1 200 Ok
```

		Content-Type: application/json

		{
			"revocation_assertion_responses": ["${base64url(json({typ: revocation_assertion+jwt, ...}))}.payload.signature", ... ]
		}
 
Credential Revocation HTTP Request
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The requests to the *Credential Issuer Revocation endpoint* MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the mandatory parameters listed below within the HTTP request message body. These MUST be encoded in ``application/JSON`` format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The requests to the *Credential Issuer Revocation endpoint* MUST be HTTP with method POST, using the mandatory parameters listed below within the HTTP request message body. These MUST be encoded in ``application/json`` format.
```

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **revocation_requests**
      - It MUST be an array of strings, where each represents a Revocation Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT as a cryptographic proof of possession to which the Digital Credential to be revoked shall be bound. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>`_ for more details.

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ .
```

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**

>     * - **revocation_assertion_requests**

Reviewer: this parameter name must be changed

the scope of the request is to request the revocation of credentials or wallet instance attestations

Author: the parameter name is changed with revocation_requests

      - It MUST be an array of strings, where each represents a Revocation Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT/CWT as a cryptographic proof of possession to which the Digital Credential to be revoked shall be bound. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>` for more details. 

>       - `[OAuth Status Assertion draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `[OAuth Status Assertion draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-assertions/01/>`_
```

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **revocation_requests**

>       - It MUST be an array of strings, where each represents a Revocation Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT/CWT as a cryptographic proof of possession to which the Digital Credential to be revoked shall be bound. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>` for more details.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - It MUST be an array of strings, where each represents a Revocation Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT/CWT as a cryptographic proof of possession to which the Digital Credential to be revoked shall be bound. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>`_ for more details.
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-assertions/01/>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_
```

- be encoded in ``application/json`` format. 

The ``revocation_assertion_responses`` object MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **revocation_assertion_responses**
      - the Revocation Assertions and or the Revocation Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.

The Revocation Assertion object MUST contain the parameter ``credential_status_validity`` with the value set to ``false``.
Below a non-normative example of a Revocation Assertion object in JWT format, with the headers and payload represented in JSON and without applying the signature.

.. code::

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "revocation-assertion+jwt",
    "kid": "Issuer-JWK-KID"
  }
 .
  {
    "iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
    "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c"
    "credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
    "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
    "credential_status_validity": false,
    "cnf": {
      "jwk": {

>         "alg": "ES256",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    * - **Status Code**
      - **Body**
      - **Description**
    * - *200 Created*
      - Revocation Assertion Response
      - The Revocation Assertion Response has been successfully created.
    * - *400 Bad Request*
      - Error code and description
      - The Credential Issuer cannot fulfill the request because of invalid parameters.
    * - *500 Internal Server Error*
      - 
      - The Credential Issuer encountered an internal problem. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).
    * - *503 Service Unavailable*
      - 
      - The Credential Issuer is temporary unavailable. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).

The ``revocation_assertion_responses`` object MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **revocation_assertion_responses**
      - the Revocation Assertions and or the Revocation Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ .
```

.. code::

    {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "status-assertion+jwt",
    "kid": $ISSUER-JWKID
	}
	.
	{
		"iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
		"iat": 1504699136,
		"exp": 1504785536,
		"credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
		"credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
		"credential_status_validity": true,
		"cnf": {
			"jwk": {...}
		}
	}

**Step 4 (Status Assertion Response)**: The response MUST include a JSON object with a member named `status_assertion_responses`, which contains the Status Assertions and or the Status Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance, as in the following non-normative example.

.. code::

    HTTP/1.1 200 Created
	Content-Type: application/json

	{
		"status_assertion_responses": ["${base64url(json({typ: status-assertion+jwt, ...}))}.payload.signature", ... ]
	}

> The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **Status Code**
      - **Body**
      - **Description**
    * - *200 Created*
      - Revocation Assertion Response
      - The Revocation Assertion Response has been successfully created.
    * - *400 Bad Request*
      - Error code and description
      - The Credential Issuer cannot fulfill the request because of invalid parameters.
    * - *500 Internal Server Error*
      - 
      - The Credential Issuer encountered an internal problem. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).
    * - *503 Service Unavailable*
      - 
      - The Credential Issuer is temporary unavailable. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).

The ``revocation_assertion_responses`` object MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**

>     * - **revocation_assertion_responses**

Reviewer: here the same as my previous comment, this parameter name must be changed

Author: As mentioned in the comment https://github.com/italia/eudi-wallet-it-docs/pull/308#discussion_r1658365625, the parameter name in changed.

      - the Revocation Assertions and or the Revocation Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

The Revocation Assertion object MUST contain the parameter ``msg`` with the value set to ``OK``.
Below a non-normative example of a Revocation Assertion object in JWT format, with the headers and payload represented in JSON and without applying the signature.

.. code::

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "revocation-assertion-error+jwt",
    "kid": "Issuer-JWK-KID"
  }

> 	.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.
```

  {
    "iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
    "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c"
    "credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
    "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",

>     "msg": "Revoked"

Reviewer: msg?

Reviewer: @SaraConsoliACN please, as discussed during our editor call, provide another parameter name with a good semantic

    * - **Status Code**
      - **Body**
      - **Description**
    * - *204 No Content*
      - 
      - The Digital Credential has been successfully revoked.
    * - *200 Created*
      - Revocation Assertion Response
      - The Revocation Assertion Response has been successfully created.
    * - *400 Bad Request*
      - Error code and description
      - The issuer cannot fulfill the request because of invalid parameters.

>     * - *404 Not Found*

Reviewer 2: Why HTTP status 404 Not Found was removed?

If the Credential doesn't exist we should rise an error to inform the wallet instance.
The Status Code 200 means that the credential is succesfully revoked by the Credential Issuer.

      - 
      - The Credential Issuer is temporary unavailable. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).

The ``revocation_assertion_responses`` object MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **revocation_assertion_responses**
      - the Revocation Assertions and or the Revocation Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02`_.
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.
```

> The Revocation Assertion object MUST contain the parameter ``credential_status_validity`` with the value set to ``false`` and the parameter ``revoked`` set to ``true``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Revocation Assertion object MUST contain the parameter ``credential_status_validity`` with the value set to ``false``.
```

> The Revocation Assertion object MUST contain the parameter ``credential_status_validity`` with the value set to ``false`` and the parameter ``revoked`` set to ``true``.

Reviewer: according to the status assertions only `credential_status_validity` is required, therefore, please remove all the other requirements ...

Below a non-normative example of a Revocation Assertion object in JWT format, with the headers and payload represented in JSON and without applying the signature.

.. code::

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "revocation-error+jwt",
    "kid": "Issuer-JWK-KID"
  }
 .
  {
    "iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
    "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c"
    "credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
    "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
    "credential_status_validity": false,

>     "credential_status": {
>       "revoked": true,
>       "suspended": false
>     },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

    "cnf": {
      "jwk": {
        "alg": "ES256",
        "kty": "EC",
        "crv": "P-256",
        "x": "_2ySUmWFjwmraNlo15r6dIBXerVdy_NpJuwAKJMFdoc",
        "y": "MV3C88MhhEMba6oyMBWuGeB3dKHP4YADJmGyJwwILsk"
      }
    }
  }

The Revocation Assertion Error object MUST contain the following parameters:

  - *error*. The error code, as registerd in the table below;
  - *error_description*. Text in human-readable form providing further details to clarify the nature of the error encountered.

Errors are meant to provide additional information about the failure so that the User can be informed and take the appropriate action.
The `error` parameter for the Revocation Assertion Error object MUST be set with one of the values defined in the table below, in addition to the values specified in :rfc:`6749#section-5.2`:

> Here's the fixed table in reStructuredText (reST) format:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

      - **Description**
    * - ``invalid_request``
      - The request is not valid due to the lack or incorrectness of one or more parameters. (:rfc:`6749#section-5.2`).
    * - ``credential_already_revoked``
      - The Digital Credential is already revoked.
    * - ``credential_updated``
      - One or more information contained in the Digital Credential are changed. The `error_description` field SHOULD contain a human-readable text describing the general parameters updated without specifying each one.
    * - ``credential_invalid``
      - The Digital Credential is invalid. The `error_description` field SHOULD contain the reason of invalidation.
    * - ``invalid_request_signature``
      - The Revocation Assertion Request signature validation has failed. This error type is used when the proof of possession of the Digital Credential is found not valid within the Revocation Assertion Request.
    * - ``credential_not_found``
      - The `credential_hash` value provided in the Revocation Assertion Request doesn't match with any active Digital Credential.
    * - ``unsupported_hash_alg``
      - The hash algorithm set in `credential_hash_alg` is not supported.

> 

Reviewer 2: It seems we already have a table with HTTP status code at line 225.
What is the meaning of these?

Author: > It seems we already have a table with HTTP status code at line 225. What is the meaning of these?

These status codes refer to the revocation assertion flow. The other table shows status assertion codes.

Below a non-normative example of a Revocation Assertion Error object in JWT format, with the headers and payload represented in JSON and without applying the signature.

.. code::

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "revocation-assertion-error+jwt",
    "kid": "Issuer-JWK-KID"
  }
  .
  {
    "iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
    "jti": "6f204f7e-e453-4dfd-814e-9d155319408c"
    "credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
    "credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
    "error": "unsupported_hash_alg",

>     "error_description": "The hash algorithm set is not supported"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "error_description": "The hash algorithm is not supported"
```

.. code::

    {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "status-assertion+jwt",
    "kid": $ISSUER-JWKID
	}
	.
	{
		"iss": "https://issuer.example.org",
		"iat": 1504699136,
		"exp": 1504785536,
		"credential_hash": $CREDENTIAL-HASH,
		"credential_hash_alg": "sha-256",
		"credential_status_validity": true,
		"cnf": {
			"jwk": {...}
		}
	}

**Step 4 (Status Assertion Response)**: The response MUST include a JSON object with a member named `status_assertion_responses`, which contains the Status Assertions and or the Status Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance, as in the following non-normative example.

.. code::

    HTTP/1.1 200 Created
	Content-Type: application/json

	{
		"status_assertion_responses": ["${base64url(json({typ: status-assertion+jwt, ...}))}.payload.signature", ... ]
	}

> The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02`_.
```

> The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The member `status_assertion_responses` MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Response object as defined in `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.
```

instead of duplicating the URL as a constant, it is required to create a ref to a defined resource, as made with all tyhe other specs

	* - ``credential_updated``
      - One or more information contained in the Digital Credential are changed. The `error_description` field SHOULD contain a human-readable text describing the general parameters updated without specifying each one.
	* - ``credential_invalid``
      - The Digital Credential is invalid. The `error_description` field SHOULD contain the reason of invalidation.  
    * - ``invalid_request_signature``
      - The Revocation Assertion Request signature validation has failed. This error type is used when the proof of possession of the Digital Credential is found not valid within the Revocation Assertion Request.
	* - ``credential_not_found``
      - The `credential_hash` value provided in the Revocation Assertion Request doesn't match with any active Digital Credential.
	* - ``unsupported_hash_alg``
      - The hash algorithm set in `credential_hash_alg` is not supported.

Below a non-normative example of a Revocation Assertion Error object in JWT format, with the headers and payload represented in JSON and without applying the signature.

.. code::

  {
    "alg": "ES256",
    "typ": "revocation-assertion-error+jwt",
    "kid": "Issuer-JWK-KID"
  }

> 	.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.
```

    :target: https://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/svg/NP31Rk9038RlynGMsWD8mDwHTWM22tlOHWML2r8rIHmoQZ9EnnuGRryFeK0vsl_tErzcpcA3nBOnDWhvsEOOJAShLxZEUe71pZOD2gozahx00LY6a_l9h9aZXalqb2oYrEXrXWt5SArRDkRaOF8Nt0oobyqMVkjnYGm1FoEo38k0PQhPvhsZxi-lvMtEAFktsuwC-Uw_sSQLLX3k32W4IXdZIGCwOW0tjZo3ROtGomBbOfrdg0Are9Bmh0fxdzQnIzTBi2B1vL5G_NrvQHpJfvsSeRVN0bKfIFS2nKEj952K2LMJF9LQB6hh7RTZPOSuFKoLJE3bNBRwlu95jcRWCmks8xZ_vRB6uWCg2WyUUz-x9P-RoqCbO0etoKtPXGWcJqU-Vnlb53mf-OhSaMVKGUfh0PxvEVeojiqN
    
    Status Assertion Request Flow

**Step 1 (Status Assertion Request)**: The Wallet Instance sends the Status Assertion Request to the Credential Issuer, where:

- The request MUST contain the base64url encoded hash value of the Digital Credential, for which the Status Assertion is requested, and enveloped in a signed Status Assertion Request object.

- The Status Assertion Request object MUST be signed with the private key corresponding to the confirmation claim assigned by the Issuer and contained within the Digital Credential.

Below a non-normative example representing a Status Assertion Request array with a single Status Assertion Request object in JWT format.

.. code::

    POST /status HTTP/1.1

> 	Host: issuer.example.org
> 	Content-Type: application/json

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Host: issuer.example.org
    Content-Type: application/json
```

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **status_assertion_requests**
      - It MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT as a cryptographic proof of possession of the Digital Credential. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>`_ for more details. 

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ .
```

Status Assertion HTTP Response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Credential Issuer* MUST return an HTTP response with the status code set to 200 and the `status_assertion_responses` array with the related Status Assertion object. The status code 200 MUST be returned if the Status Assertion is requested for a valid, non-existent, expired, revoked or invalid Digital Credential.

The response MUST:

- include a JSON object with a member named `status_assertion_responses`;

- be encoded in ``application/json`` format. 

It MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_status_assertion_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **status_assertion_responses**
      - the Status Assertions and or the Status Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **status_assertion_requests**

>       - It MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT/CWT as a cryptographic proof of possession of the Digital Credential. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>` for more details. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - It MUST be an array of strings, where each of them represent a Status Assertion Request object. Each element MUST contain a signed JWT/CWT as a cryptographic proof of possession of the Digital Credential. See Section :ref:`Credential Proof of Possession <sec_revocation_credential_pop>`_ for more details. 
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

Status Assertion HTTP Response
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The *Credential Issuer* MUST return an HTTP response with the status code set to 200 and the `status_assertion_responses` array with the related Status Assertion object. The status code 200 MUST be returned if the Status Assertion is requested for a valid, non-existent, expired, revoked or invalid Digital Credential.

The response MUST:

- include a JSON object with a member named `status_assertion_responses`;

- be encoded in ``application/json`` format. 

It MUST contain the following mandatory claims.

.. _table_http_status_assertion_response_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Claim**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **status_assertion_responses**
      - the Status Assertions and or the Status Assertion Errors related to the request made by the Wallet Instance. 

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    * - **Status Code**
      - **Body**
      - **Description**
    * - *200 Created*
      - Status Assertion Response
      - The Status Assertion Response has been successfully created and it has been returned.  
    * - *400 Bad Request*
      - Error code and description
      - The Credential Issuer cannot fulfill the request because of invalid parameters.
    * - *404 Not Found*
      - 

>       - The Digital Credential may not be found by the Issuer, or the Status Attestation cannot be issued because the Credential has been revoked or updated.

Reviewer 2: Can we use the same approach for the credential revocation response?

Credential Proof of Possession
------------------------------

The Credential Proof of Possession (**credential_pop**) MUST be a JWT that MUST contain the parameters (Header and Payload) in the following table.

.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Header**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **typ**

>       - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+jwt``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+jwt``, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+jwt``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+jwt``, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ .
```

      - :rfc:`7516#section-4.1.1`.
    * - **alg**
      - A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms listed in the Section `Cryptographic Algorithms <algorithms.html>`_ and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or any symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.
      - :rfc:`7516#section-4.1.1`.
    * - **kid**

>       -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

Credential Proof of Possession
------------------------------

The Credential Proof of Possession (**credential_pop**) MUST be a JWT or a CWT that MUST contain the parameters (Header and Payload) in the following table.

.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Header**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **typ**

>       - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+{jwt,cwt}``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+{jwt,cwt}``, according to `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+{jwt,cwt}``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+{jwt,cwt}``, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

>       - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+{jwt,cwt}``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+{jwt,cwt}``, according to `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-assertions/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - In case of revocation request it MUST be set to ``revocation-request+{jwt,cwt}``. In case of Status Assertion request it MUST be set to ``status-assertion-request+{jwt,cwt}``, according to `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.
```

see my previous comment

      - :rfc:`7516#section-4.1.1`.
    * - **alg**
      - A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms listed in the Section `Cryptographic Algorithms <algorithms.html>`_ and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or any symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.
      - :rfc:`7516#section-4.1.1`.
    * - **kid**

>       -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

>       -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-assertions/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      -  Unique identifier of the ``jwk`` or ``COSE_Key`` inside the ``cnf`` claim of the Credential to be revoked, as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value, according to `[OAuth Status Assertions] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-oauth-status-assertions>`_.
```

      - It MUST contain the Algorithm used for hashing the Digital Credential. The value SHOULD be set to `S256`.
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Revocation Assertion
------------------

When the JWT or CWT format are used, the Revocation Assertion MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**
    - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Revocation Assertion. Revocation Assertion that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.
    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 

>     - It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-respone+jwt` when JWT format is used. It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+cwt` when CWT format is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+jwt` when JWT format is used. It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+cwt` when CWT format is used.
```

    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_..

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the JWT.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.7] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_.
    * - **msg**
      - Message returned from the Credential Issuer after revocation. It MUST be set with the value "OK".

>       - This specification.

Reviewer: ????

Reviewer: this msg is not defined in the status assertion draft.

      - It MUST contain the Algorithm used for hashing the Digital Credential. The value SHOULD be set to `S256`.

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

Revocation Assertion
--------------------

When the JWT format is used, the Revocation Assertion MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_revocation_assertion_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**

>     - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Revocation Assertion. Revocation Assertion that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Revocation Assertion. Revocation Assertion that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 
    - It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+jwt` when JWT format is used.

>     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

.. _table_revocation_assertion_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the JWT.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.7] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_.
    * - **credential_status_validity**
      - Boolean value indicating the absolute validity of the Credential linked to the Status Assertion. It MUST be set with the value `false`.

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

please use a reference not a static url

    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 
    - It MUST be set to `status-assertion-request+jwt` when JWT format is used.
    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_..
  * - **kid**
    -  Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer ``jwk`` as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value.
    - :rfc:`7638#section_3`. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **iat**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the time of JWT issuance.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **exp**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the expiry time of the JWT. It MUST be greater than the value set for `iat`.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **credential_hash**
      - Hash value of the Credential the Status Assertion is bound to.

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **credential_hash_alg**
      - The Algorithm used for hashing the Credential to which the Status Assertion is bound. The value SHOULD be set to ``S256``.

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **credential_status_validity**
      - Boolean value indicating the absolute validity of the Credential linked to the Status Assertion. It is REQUIRED and it MUST be set with the value "false" or "true".

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **cnf**
      - JSON object containing confirmation methods. The sub-member contained within `cnf` member, such as `jwk` for JWT, MUST match with the one provided within the related Digital Credential. Other confirmation methods can be utilized when the referenced Digital Credential supports them, in accordance with the relevant standards.
      - `[RFC7800, Section 3.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_ and `[RFC8747, Section 3.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_.

Error Assertion
------------------

When the JWT format is used, the Revocation or Status Assertion Error MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_error_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**

>     - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Assertion Error. Assertion Error that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Assertion Error. Assertion Error that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 
    - It MUST be set to `status-assertion-response+jwt` or `revocation-assertion-response+jwt` when JWT format is used.

>     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ .
```

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_error_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the JWT.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.7] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7519>`_.
    * - **error**

>       - Status code returned from the Credential Issuer after revocation. The value SHOULD be assigned with one of the error types defined in  {{RFC6749}}[Section 5.2]<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2> or defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Status code returned from the Credential Issuer after revocation. The value SHOULD be assigned with one of the error types defined in  {{RFC6749}}[Section 5.2]<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2> or defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_. 
```

>       - `[RFC6749, Section 5.2] <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2>`_, `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `[RFC6749, Section 5.2] <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2>`_, `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_
```

    * - **error_description**
      - Text that clarifies the nature of the error, such as attribute changes, revocation reasons, in relation to the `error` value.

>       - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_.
```

    * - **credential_hash_alg**
      - It MUST contain the Algorithm used for hashing the Digital Credential. The value SHOULD be set to `S256`.
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.
    * - **credential_type**
      - Type of credential (e.g., Personal Identification Data, European Disability Card, European Health Insurance Card, Driver's License, etc.)
      -
    * - **user_identifier**
      - 	Identifier used to avoid direct linking between the credential hash and the owner.
      -
    * - **document_id**
      - 	Unique identifier of the document to which the attestation refers.

>       -

Reviewer: no

non deve contenere alcuna informazione relativa alla credenziale se non la sola prova di possesso della credenziale a cui è riferita?

>     * - **credential_type**
>       - Type of credential (e.g., Personal Identification Data, European Disability Card, European Health Insurance Card, Driver's License, etc.)
>       -
>     * - **user_identifier**
>       - 	Identifier used to avoid direct linking between the credential hash and the owner.
>       -
>     * - **document_id**
>       - 	Unique identifier of the document to which the attestation refers.
>       -

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Revocation Assertion
--------------------

When the JWT or CWT format are used, the Revocation Assertion MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_revocation_assertion_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**

>     - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Revocation Assertion. Revocation Assertion that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Revocation Assertion. Revocation Assertion that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 
    - It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+jwt` when JWT format is used. It MUST be set to `revocation-assertion-response+cwt` when CWT format is used.

>     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

.. _table_revocation_assertion_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the JWT.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.7] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_.
    * - **credential_status_validity**
      - Boolean value indicating the absolute validity of the Credential linked to the Status Assertion. It MUST be set with the value `false`.
      - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

>     * - **revoked**
>       - Boolean value indicating the status of Credential revocation. It MUST be set with the value `true` in revocation scenario.
>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.
>     * - **suspended**
>       -  Boolean value indicating the status of Credential suspension. It MUST be set with the value `false` in revocation scenario.
>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer: ad oggi non supportiamo la sospensione ...

    

Status Assertion
------------------

When the JWT or CWT format are used, the Status Assertion MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**
    - A digital signature algorithm identifier such as per IANA "JSON Web Signature and Encryption Algorithms" registry. It MUST be one of the supported algorithms in Section :ref:`Cryptographic Algorithms <supported_algs>` and MUST NOT be set to ``none`` or to a symmetric algorithm (MAC) identifier.
    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 

>     - It MUST be set to `status-assertion-request+jwt` when JWT format is used. It MUST be set to `status-assertion-request+cwt` when CWT format is used.

Reviewer: ad oggi non supportiamo CWT

    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_..
  * - **kid**
    -  Unique identifier of the Credential Issuer ``jwk`` as base64url-encoded JWK Thumbprint value.
    - :rfc:`7638#section_3`. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **iat**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the time of JWT/CWT issuance.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **exp**
      - UNIX Timestamp with the expiry time of the JWT/CWT. It MUST be greater than the value set for `iat`.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **credential_hash**
      - Hash value of the Credential the Status Assertion is bound to.

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    * - **credential_hash_alg**
      - The Algorithm used for hashing the Credential to which the Status Assertion is bound. The value SHOULD be set to ``S256``.

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    * - **credential_status_validity**
      - Boolean value indicating the absolute validity of the Credential linked to the Status Assertion. It is REQUIRED and it MUST be set with the value "false" or "true".

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

>     * - **revoked**
>       - Boolean value indicating the status of Credential revocation when the `credential_status_validity` is set to `false`. It MAY be set with the value `false` or `true`.
>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.
>     * - **suspended**
>       -  Boolean value indicating the status of Credential suspension. It MAY be set with the value `false` or `true`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    * - **cnf**
      - JSON object containing confirmation methods. The sub-member contained within `cnf` member, such as `jwk` for JWT and `Cose_Key` for CWT, MUST match with the one provided within the related Digital Credential. Other confirmation methods can be utilized when the referenced Digital Credential supports them, in accordance with the relevant standards.
      - `[RFC7800, Section 3.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_ and `[RFC8747, Section 3.1] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7800>`_.

Error Assertion
------------------

When the JWT or CWT format are used, the Revocation or Status Assertion Error MUST contain the following claims. 

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_error_header: 
.. list-table:: 
  :widths: 20 60 20
  :header-rows: 1

  * - **Header**
    - **Description**
    - **Reference**
  * - **alg**

>     - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Assertion Error. Assertion Error that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - Algorithm used to verify the cryptographic signature of the Assertion Error. Assertion Error that do not need to be signed SHOULD set the `alg` value to `none` in according with `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

    - `[OIDC4VCI. Draft 13] <https://openid.bitbucket.io/connect/openid-4-verifiable-credential-issuance-1_0.html>`_, [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`].
  * -  **typ** 
    - It MUST be set to `status-assertion-response+jwt` or `revocation-assertion-response+jwt` when JWT format is used. It MUST be set to `status-assertion-response+cwt` or `revocation-assertion-response+cwt` when CWT format is used.

>     - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - [:rfc:`7515`], [:rfc:`7517`], `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```

.. _table_non_revocation_assertion_error_claim:
.. list-table:: 
    :widths: 20 60 20
    :header-rows: 1

    * - **Payload**
      - **Description**
      - **Reference**
    * - **iss**
      - It MUST be set to the identifier of the Credential Issuer.
      - :rfc:`9126` and :rfc:`7519`.
    * - **jti**
      - Unique identifier for the JWT.
      - `[RFC7519, Section 4.1.7] <https://www.iana.org/go/rfc7519>`_.
    * - **error**

>       - Status code returned from the Credential Issuer after revocation. The value SHOULD be assigned with one of the error types defined in  {{RFC6749}}[Section 5.2]<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2> or defined in `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_ 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - Status code returned from the Credential Issuer after revocation. The value SHOULD be assigned with one of the error types defined in  {{RFC6749}}[Section 5.2]<https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2> or defined in `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02. 
```

>       - `[RFC6749, Section 5.2] <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2>`_, `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `[RFC6749, Section 5.2] <https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749#section-5.2>`_, `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02
```

    * - **error_description**
      - Text that clarifies the nature of the error, such as attribute changes, revocation reasons, in relation to the `error` value.

>       - `[OAuth Status Attestation draft 01] <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-demarco-status-attestations/01/>`_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      - `OAUTH-STATUS-ASSERTION`_ draft 02.
```
